## CONCEPTUAL MODELS

**A conceptual model is an explanation, usually highly simplified, of how
something works**. It doesn’t have to be complete or even accurate as long as it
is useful.

The files, folders, and icons you see displayed on a computer screen help people
create the conceptual model of documents and folders inside the computer, or of
apps or applications residing on the screen, waiting to be summoned. In fact,
there are no folders inside the computer--those are effective conceptualizations
designed to make them easier to use.

Conceptual models found in technical manuals and books for technical use can be
detailed and complex. The ones we are concerned with here are simpler: they
reside in the minds of the people who are using the product, so they are also
“mental models.” Mental models, as the name implies, are the conceptual models in
people’s minds that represent their understanding of how things work.

Conceptual models are often inferred from the device itself. Some models are
passed on from person to person. Some come from manuals. Usually the device
itself offers very little assistance, so the model is constructed by experience.
Quite often these models are erroneous, and therefore lead to difficulties in
using the device.

Consider a pair of scissors: you can see that the number of possible actions is
limited. The holes are clearly there to put something into, and the only logical
things that will fit are fingers. The holes are both affordances—they allow the
fingers to be inserted—and signifiers—they indicate where the fingers are to go.
The sizes of the holes provide constraints to limit the possible fingers: a big
hole suggests several fingers; a small hole, only one. The mapping between holes
and fingers—the set of possible operations—is signified and constrained by the
holes. You can figure out the scissors because their operating parts are visible
and the implications clear.

The conceptual model is obvious, and there is effective use of signifiers,
affordances, and constraints.

![digital-watch](../images/digital-watch.png)

The watch provides no visible relationship between the buttons and the possible
actions, no discernible relationship between the actions and the end results.

Conceptual models are valuable in providing understanding, in predicting how
things will behave, and in figuring out what to do when things do not go as
planned. A good conceptual model allows us to predict the effects of our
actions. Without a good model, we operate by rote, blindly; we do operations as
we were told to do them; we can’t fully appreciate why, what effects to expect,
or what to do if things go wrong.

For everyday things, conceptual models need not be very complex. After all,
scissors, pens, and light switches are pretty simple devices. There is no need
to understand the underlying physics or chemistry of each device we own, just
the relationship between the controls and the outcomes. When the model presented
to us is inadequate or wrong (or, worse, nonexistent), we can have difficulties.

![freezer-ref](../images/freezer-ref.png)

The controls suggest a false conceptual model. Two compartments, two controls,
which implies that each control is responsible for the temperature of the
compartment that carries its name. It is wrong. In fact, there is only one
thermostat and only one cooling mechanism. One control adjusts the thermostat
setting, the other the relative proportion of cold air sent to each of the two
compartments of the refrigerator.

![freezer-ref-2](../images/freezer-ref-2.png)

Perhaps the designers thought the correct model was too complex, that the model
they were giving was easier to understand. But with the wrong conceptual model,
it was impossible to set the controls. And even though I am convinced I knew the
correct model, I still couldn’t accurately adjust the temperatures because the
refrigerator design made it impossible to discover which control was for the
temperature sensor, which for the relative proportion of cold air, and in which
compartment the sensor was located. The lack of immediate feedback for the
actions did not help: it took twenty-four hours to see whether the new setting
was appropriate. I shouldn’t have to keep a laboratory notebook and do
controlled experiments just to set the temperature of my refrigerator.

## Imagem do sistema

People create mental models of themselves, others, the environment, and the
things with which they interact. These are conceptual models formed through
experience, training, and instruction. These models serve as guides to help
achieve our goals and in understanding the world.

How do we form an appropriate conceptual model for the devices we interact with?
We cannot talk to the designer, so we rely upon whatever information is
available to us: what the device looks like, what we know from using similar
things in the past, what was told to us in the sales literature, by salespeople
and advertisements, by articles we may have read, by the product website and
instruction manuals. I call the combined information available to us the system
image. When the system image is incoherent or inappropriate, as in the case of
the refrigerator, then the user cannot easily use the device. If it is
incomplete or contradictory, there will be trouble.

![system-image](../images/system-image.png)

The designer’s conceptual model is the designer’s conception of the product,
occupying one vertex of the triangle. The product itself is no longer with the
designer, so it is isolated as a second vertex, perhaps sitting on the user’s
kitchen counter. The system image is what can be perceived from the physical
structure that has been built (including documentation, instructions,
signifiers, and any information available from websites and help lines). The
user’s conceptual model comes from the system image, through interaction with
the product, reading, searching for online information, and from whatever
manuals are provided. The designer expects the user’s model to be identical to
the design model, but because designers cannot communicate directly with users,
the entire burden of communication is on the system image.

Figure 1.11 indicates why communication is such an important aspect of good
design. No matter how brilliant the product, if people cannot use it, it will
receive poor reviews. It is up to the designer to provide the appropriate
information to make the product understandable and usable. Most important is
the provision of a good conceptual model that guides the user when thing go
wrong. With a good conceptual model, people can figure out what has happened
and correct the things that went wrong. Without a good model, they struggle,
often making matters worse.

Good conceptual models are the key to understandable, enjoyable products: good
communication is the key to good conceptual models.

O objetivo é que o modelo conceitual feito delo designer seja o mais próximo da
imagem do sistema criada pelo usuário.


## O Paradoxo da tecnologia

Technology offers the potential to make life easier and more enjoyable; each
new technology provides increased benefits. At the same time, added
complexities increase our difficulty and frustration with technology. The
design problem posed by technological advances is enormous.

Consider the wristwatch. A few decades ago, watches were simple. All you had to
do was set the time and keep the watch wound. The standard control was the
stem: a knob at the side of the watch. Turning the knob would wind the spring
that provided power to the watch movement. Pulling out the knob and turning it
rotated the hands. The operations were easy to learn and easy to do. The
design even took into account human error. In its normal position, turning the
stem wound the mainspring of the clock. The stem had to be pulled before it
would engage the gears for setting the time.

Watches in olden times were expensive instruments, manufactured by hand. They
were sold in jewelry stores. Over time, with the introduction of digital
technology, the cost of watches decreased rapidly, while their accuracy and
reliability increased.

The added functions cause problems: How can all these functions fit into a
small, wearable size? There are no easy answers. Many people have solved the
problem by not using a watch. They use their phone instead. A cell phone
performs all the functions much better than the tiny watch, while also
displaying the time.

The same technology that simplifies life by providing more functions in each
device also complicates life by making the device harder to learn, harder to
use. This is the paradox of technology and the challenge for the designer.

## The Design Challenge

Design requires the cooperative efforts of multiple disciplines. The number of
different disciplines required to produce a successful product is staggering.
Great design requires great designers, but that isn’t enough: it also requires
great management, because the hardest part of producing a product is
coordinating all the many, separate disciplines, each with different goals and
priorities.

Finally, people have to actually purchase it. It doesn’t matter how good a
product is if, in the end, nobody uses it.

Quite often each discipline believes its distinct contribution to be most
important: “Price,” argues the marketing representative, “price plus these
features.” “Reliable,” insist the engineers. “We have to be able to manufacture
it in our existing plants,” say the manufacturing representatives. “We keep
getting service calls,” say the support people; “we need to solve those
problems in the design.” “You can’t put all that together and still have a
reasonable product,” says the design team. Who is right? Everyone is right.
The successful product has to satisfy all these requirements.

The hard part is to convince people to understand the viewpoints of the others,
to abandon their disciplinary viewpoint and to think of the design from the
viewpoints of the person who buys the product and those who use it, often
different people. The viewpoint of the business is also important, because it
does not matter how wonderful the product is if not enough people buy it. If a
product does not sell, the company must often stop producing it, even if it is
a great product. Few companies can sustain the huge cost of keeping an
unprofitable product alive long enough for its sales to reach profitability.

Designing well is not easy. The manufacturer wants something that can be
produced economically. The store wants something that will be attractive to its
customers. The purchaser has several demands. In the store, the purchaser
focuses on price and appearance, and perhaps on prestige value. At home, the
same person will pay more attention to functionality and usability. The repair
service cares about maintainability: how easy is the device to take apart,
diagnose, and service? The needs of those concerned are different and often
conflict.

Nonetheless, if the design team has representatives from all the constituencies
present at the same time, it is often possible to reach satisfactory solutions
for all the needs. It is when the disciplines operate independently of one
another that major clashes and deficiencies occur. The challenge is to use the
principles of human-centered design to produce positive results, products that
enhance lives and add to our pleasure and enjoyment. The goal is to produce a
great product, one that is successful, and that customers love. It can be done.
